Topic ideas
================
Six Thirty Eight
10/11/19

## Topic Ideas

### Idea \#1

African Economic Crises -

How has the African economy changed over time, what does an “African
economic crisis” look like, and how has the world responded/how has
Africa responded to the world?

Original Dataset (containing all countries):
<https://www.hbs.edu/behavioral-finance-and-financial-stability/data/Pages/global.aspx>

Derived Dataset (containing African countries, cleaned for years with
economic data):
<https://www.kaggle.com/chirin/africa-economic-banking-and-systemic-crisis-data/version/1#>

### Idea \#2

How do different characteristics of Airbnb postings affect the price they
can charge?

Airbnb’s have been on the rise, with more people using the
service to book temporary accommodation, whether it be for vacations,
business trips, and more. Yet what’s not transparent is understanding
how hosts can charge what they do. Good questions to explore:

How does the location, reputation, and restrictions on the reservation
affect how much is charged for the booking? Sentiment analysis or word
analysis — what descriptors in the listing title can lead to you
charging higher prices? See below for dataset.

### Idea \#3

Looking at the changing nature of warfare through nuclear explosions -
What is the intent of nuclear bombs? What are the primary means of
deployment given geographic locations? Do the countries utilizing
nuclear weapons shift in frequency over time? See below for dataset.

### Idea \#4

The data set in the repo provides information on female and male world
records and Olympic times for swimming, track, and field. We can ask the
following questions: How do times for men and women differ across
different events? Are there certain events where women match or
outperform their male counterparts? Are female world records
faster/better than the average male Olympic time for an event? Are there
any countries that produce exceptionally strong male or female athletes?

## Datasets

### Dataset \#1

Original Dataset (containing all countries): - related to Topic \#1
<https://www.hbs.edu/behavioral-finance-and-financial-stability/data/Pages/global.aspx>

Also, see global\_crisis\_data.csv in /data

Derived Dataset (containing African countries, cleaned for years with
economic data):
<https://www.kaggle.com/chirin/africa-economic-banking-and-systemic-crisis-data/version/1#>

Also, see african\_crises.csv in /data

### Dataset \#2

Kaggle dataset of Airbnb rentals in NYC for 2019: “New York City Airbnb
Open Data” - related to Topic \#2
<https://www.kaggle.com/dgomonov/new-york-city-airbnb-open-data>

### Dataset \#3

Related to topic \#3
<https://github.com/rfordatascience/tidytuesday/blob/master/data/2019/2019-08-20/nuclear_explosions.csv>

### Dataset \#4

Data from Buzzfeed repo
<https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-08-sports-gender-gaps>
